# Convergence testing

Given that rendering a scene involves firing a lot of rays, we want to
make each ray cheap. Each ray involves stepping along the path, so
minimising the number of steps seems a good idea.

Tracing along the path is effectively a numerical differential
equation solver, and the convergence on the true solution is going to
depend on the step size. This trade-off between accuracy and step size
is what this project intends to explore.

## Vague theory

There's a complicating factor in that if the path is overall
divergent, a small error at the start can accumulate over the course
of the path. That is, the way errors accumulate along the path depend
on positive and negative curvature. For simplicity's sake, I'm going
to ignore this, but I suspect that this is also a good reason why I
should look at the empirical convergence behaviour (see below).

Assuming (incorrectly) that the final error is simply an accumulation
of step-wise error along the path, we can look into the local
convergence properties. If this were simply a linear approximation to
a curve, we would expect the convergence to be quadratic, as error
accumulates from the second-order term being approximated
linearly. However, we don't do a linear approximation: the whole point
of the algorithm is to take a linear step and then solve for a point
in the surface to take account of the local curvature. The error in
the step comes from the change in curvature along the length of the
step.

Naively, I expect convergence to be cubic - the error comes from the
change in normal perpendicular to the current plane of curviture, so
it's got a derivative-of-a-derivative element to it. Furthermore, we
expect the the error to be proportional to that second
derivative/twistiness term.

While I could try to convert my intuition into some formal maths, I'd
much rather do some practical tests on my application and see how it
behaves.

## First practical results

My theory was *totally* wrong! I'm keeping in the text above as an
example of my hubris. :p

Looking at [ratios.csv](./ratios.csv), generated by convergence-test,
we can see that, over the various paths, each time the step size is
doubled, the error is doubled (the first number on each row is off,
because it's basing the error prediction on the smallest step size
being fully correct).

Trying to rejig my intuition to match reality, I guess the simplest
version of "tracing a path through a curve space embedded in a higher
dimension" is a polygonal approximation to a circle, and there, the
errors in the approximation are linear with step size. Ho hum.

From here, I want to understand the error behaviour better - the error
in position vs. the error in direction of the final ray, how the error
accumulates over the ray, and how that relates to curvature along the
ray, etc. 

TODO: Extend the code, provide more modes, etc.
